Today I'm chatting with Lewis Ballard
who is farm animal welfare program
director at Open Philanthropy and Open
Philanthropy is the biggest charity in
this animal welfare space. So Lewis,
thanks so much for coming on the
podcast.
>> Thanks for having me on.
>> Okay, first question. At some point
we'll have AGI. How do you just think
about the problem you're trying to
solve? Are you trying to make conditions
more tolerable for the next 10 years
until AI solves this problem for us? or
is there some reason to think that the
interventions we're making in terms of
improvements like an over sexing or
cage-free eggs etc will have an impact
beyond this transformative moment.
>> I think that the end of factory farming
is far from inevitable. Every year we're
factory farming about 2% more animals
globally. I think there are two possible
trajectories we could go down. One is
the trajectory that we have been on for
the last century which is technology has
made factory farming ever more efficient
resulted in ever more animals being
abused in ever more intensive ways.
>> There is a trajectory where we reduce
the number of animals on factory farms
where we reduce the suffering of each of
those animals. So even if we get AGI I I
am really optimistic that that will
accelerate forms of technological
progress. It will bring us better
alternative proteins. It will improve
the humane technology. But there are
still huge cultural and political
obstacles to alternatives. So the
cultural obstacles are that most people
want real meat. I mean, most people have
the option already of plant-based meat
that tastes about as good as real meat.
And that's it. I don't know.
>> So this is the debate. That's fair. This
is a debate. But I don't think that's
just the obstacle that people have. I
think there are a lot of people who say,
I'm just not interested in, you know,
the alternative. I want the real thing.
And then there's also the political
obstacle. So let's say that AGI solves
cultivated meat for us.
>> Well, cultivated meat's already illegal
in seven US states. It's it's might soon
be illegal in the entire European Union.
So by the time we get AGI, will they
even be able to sell it anywhere? So
again, I think there's a huge amount of
good that technology can do in this
space and I'm optimistic that AGI can
accelerate that hugely. But at the same
time, I think we should prepare for the
significant possibility that AGI does
not end factory farming. that actually
this is an incredibly efficient system
that has persisted through all kinds of
technological changes and that could
persist through this technological
change.
>> What is it that makes it so efficient?
>> So the the basic efficiency is the the
animal and the chicken in particular
>> has evolved over a very long time to be
a a a being that can take in a
relatively small amount of grain
>> and convert it very efficiently into a
form of protein that people like to eat.
So the feed conversion ratio for
chickens, the amount of grain you put in
to get meat out is like two 2x. And that
grain is incredibly cheap. Uh and the
rest of the production process is
incredibly cheap because they've they've
removed everything that costs money
around like treating the animals well
and providing comfort and all that
stuff. They've just gotten rid of it
all. So they've gotten down to the point
where it's insanely cheap.
>> So you're trying to beat the price of
grain times two plus a few extra costs.
>> And that is that is actually a really
hard really hard target to meet. And and
that's why factory farm chicken is so
insanely cheap today.
>> Maybe an intuition pump here is we've
been spending on the order of hundreds
of billions of dollars a year in order
to replicate human intelligence. And
human intelligence has been developed I
don't know it depends on when when you
start counting intelligence has started
evolving but like on the order of
hundreds to tens of millions of uh years
ago evolution has been trying to
optimize for this intelligence thing and
we've had to spend all this effort in
order to replicate it. Converting
calories into meat has been something
that evolution has been optimizing for
billions of years. Right? So everything
from the immune system to growth factors
to delivering nutrition etc. text or
whatever. This is like this is what
Evolution is working on the entire time.
Um, so it it makes sense why this is
actually such a tough problem. Are you
are you ready to throw some cold water
on your friends?
How uh how far away is cultivated meat?
Actually,
>> I think it completely depends on what we
do from here. Okay.
>> So, and it also depends on what you mean
by cultivated meat. I mean, there are
companies right now that are selling
cultivated meat in very small volumes at
very high price points, which is
incredible. The challenge from here is
how do you scale that and bring the
price point down to compete with the
incredibly low price point of factory
farm chicken
>> and I think how long it takes to get
there and indeed whether we get there
really depends on what happens from
here. We are not we are not on a path
right now when it comes to the amount of
venture capital funding available when
it comes to the current startups
available. We're not on a path to reach
cultivated meat that is cheaper than
factory farmed chicken. I think we could
get on that path ever. Well, I mean it
depends contingent on AGI and contingent
on what happens with AGI, right? Like I
I wouldn't rule it out, but I don't
think it's the default path. I don't
think it's the most likely outcome.
>> I mean, eventually we'll have like
nanotech or whatever, right? At that
point, raising chickens can't be the
thing to do.
>> Well, you would think like nanotech and
bringing robotics and all these things,
but like unless the cost of all those
things goes down to close to zero,
chickens are just going to be so
insanely cheap. And so, yeah, maybe like
I think it is totally possible that
these AGI technologies introduce
incredible new proteins that that help
solve this problem for us. But I don't
think we should rely on it. First,
because they might not be able to solve
some of these problems to the point that
it is as cheap as chicken. But second,
because you still have these cultural
and political barriers.
>> So the reason I think this is a very
interesting example is because whenever
people think about the use of technology
to improve animal welfare, they're
thinking about cultivated meat, lab
meat, um they're thinking about these
extremely faroff solutions. And then it
makes sense why even people who are
especially concerned about the space.
The first thought is not to just like
find ways to make the existing regime
more tolerable but to come up with some
moonshot that changes the whole
paradigm. If you look at how much VC
investment is going towards cultivated
meat. I don't know if you like no but
probably on the Yeah. Do you have some
sense of how much is go go goes into the
year versus how much VC investment goes
into okay we've already got the farms.
What is it that we need to do to make um
come up with more things like let's put
the eggs through MRIs, let's do these
other small improvements in welfare.
>> Uh yeah, there's a huge difference. So I
mean it's probably the venture capital
on the humane technology is is probably
less than $10 million a year.
>> 10 million.
>> That would be my guess. Whereas the
venture capital on the alternative
proteins has been in the billions over
the last few years,
>> right? Which has probably been motivated
at least partly by the sense of we're
going to make things more ethical. And
people might not realize that in the
near term to actually make things more
ethical, it might be just better to
increase that 10 million pool.
>> I think it's good to do both. Like I I
think both of these are important,
right? I think that I I can see why
alternative proteins have a more
promising allure to investors. First,
there could be higher margins, but but
second, it feels more like the electric
vehicle or the solar that just totally
replaces the old practice. something
totally new that that replac and I think
it has that potential for some portion
of the market. But I what I don't see
happening anytime soon is the entire
market switching over to these
alternative proteins. And so I think we
need alternative proteins to meet the
world's growing demand for protein so
that we don't just have ever more
factory farming. And we need humane
technology to reduce the suffering
within the factory farming that does
exist.
>> So um whenever a discussion like this
comes up, it's often phrased in the
context of personal behavior. Like I
think people will be assuming that what
we're going to get up to is like this um
push to make you vegetarian. And I I
happen to have been vegetarian. I grew
up a Hindu and so I've like never eaten
meat. Um and then I just stayed a
vegetarian after um I was no longer a
Hindu. Um but then I started prepping to
interview you and I'm like [__] this
might
I don't know how valuable this is.
Especially if you look at some of these
um online charity evaluators and you're
just like a dollar of your donation will
offset this much meat eating and you're
like I what are we doing here? But
anyways, um vegetarianism overrated.
I think we made a mistake as a movement
making this about personal diet. I think
it's it's great when folks want to make
a personal diet decision whether that is
eating less meat or meat from more
humane sources, but the focus should not
be on the individual. This is not how
largecale social change occurs. I think
we need government reform. I think we
need corporate reform and people can be
a part of that regardless of what they
eat, regardless of what their diet is. I
think that we need people to be
advocates and funders and supporters of
this cause.
>> So, how did we end up in this position
where so much um I think when people
think about animal welfare, they think
pea, they think of like uh protest which
are encouraging individuals to to give
up meat consumption. At the same time,
these charities which are so effective
at corporate or policy change are just
like so so neglected. Um how did this
end up being the landscape of animal
welfare activism and funding?
>> Yeah, I I think it's a puzzle. I mean it
seems so obvious that you can have far
larger scale change at the level of
governmental change and and corporate
change and instead we get fixated about
whether someone is completely vegan or
vegetarian or like and I think what
happened is when people started learning
about this issue initially it was just a
few people and they felt totally
powerless to achieve larger scale change
and so they understandably focused on
themselves and then it started to become
a self-fulfilling prophecy. it started
to become an end in itself where it was
about personal purity as much as about
the impact you're having on the issue.
And it's much easier to measure your own
personal purity than it is to measure
your total impact on reforming factory
farming. And so I think it just became
this kind of inward focus. And the good
news is I think that has changed
tremendously in the last decade. I think
the movement has gone from being one
that was obsessed with personal purity,
obsessed with dietary choices to one
that is much more obsessed with impact.
Okay. So this is why I really wanted to
do this episode which is I think people
will be aware that there's a general
problem here but the actual politics and
the actual economics the actual state of
the technology landscape here there
might be interventions which are
stupendously effective um which would
overlook just because people are not
aware of what's actually happening in
the space. So on that point to use an
analogy from global health and poverty
the against Miller Foundation estimates
that it saved on the order of 180,000
lives or something which is a lot and
but then you compare it to China
liberalizing brought a billion people
out of poverty that just like a many
many orders of magnitude bigger impact
in animal welfare. Do do you have some
like big take about what the uh China
liberalizing equivalent in this space
is? Yeah, I think there have been three
largecale drivers of progress so far. So
the first has been government policy. So
advocates got the European Union to set
basic animal welfare standards. That is
billions of animals every year.
>> Billions every year. Then there's
corporate reforms and we see the same
thing that there's this incredible scale
across these corporate supply chains. I
mean McDonald's just implemented its
pledge to go cage free in the US. That
alone is 7 million hens every year out
of cages just in the McDonald's supply
chain. And then the third lever is
technology. One example would be
innoving as a new technology that can
get rid of the need to kill male chicks
in the egg industry. The unwanted chicks
are killed at birth. And anovo sexing
has already spared about 200 million
chicks from that fate. So there are
these giant drivers. And the good news
is we're just getting started with them.
There is the potential I think to help
tens of billions of animals through
these drivers.
>> Okay, I want to go into Innovo sexing.
Yeah, just the fact that you can have a
new technology and you can have
basically uh parto improvements where
things aren't getting more expensive.
Maybe in the future they'll actually get
cheaper because of this technology. At
the same time, you're having
improvements in animal welfare. The
problem of course with this industry has
been that in the past increases in
efficiency have been coupled with
increases in cruelty. So I want to
understand whenever the trend goes in
the opposite direction, what causes that
to be the case? So what is the history
of this technology? How does it work?
Why did it take so long for it to um
come into common practice?
>> Sure. Yeah. Yeah. So I mean the the
historical basis is a story of
technology doing harm which was we
initially the egg industry and the meat
chicken industry separated because they
realized they could grow meat chickens
to be optimized for weight gain and
laying hands to be optimized for laying
eggs.
>> That meant that the laying egg industry
had no need of the male chicks because
they couldn't lay eggs and they couldn't
grow fast enough to be meat chickens.
>> And so what they decided was to just
kill them on the day they were born. And
so the standard practice, and this is
about 8 billion chicks globally every
year, are just thrown in a giant meat
grinder or suffocated in bags the day
they're born. Crazy.
>> This new technology is basically the
application of existing technologies uh
to scan the eggs in advance and work out
whether they're going to be male or
female. And then you can just get rid of
the male eggs very early in the
incubation phase. And this technology
went from 10 years ago just being a
vague idea to today it's already a third
of the European egg industry. Uh and it
just got introduced to the United
States. We got the first eggs coming out
in the United States now. So this is a
technology that is growing rapidly and
I'm really optimistic can can ultimately
end this problem globally.
>> And how much was this driven by policy
versus the tech being mature enough for
it to be economical?
>> I think it was both. So first there was
some policy up front which was because
advocates had drawn attention to this
practice of killing male chicks.
>> There was real impetus by governments
and philanthropists to support
kickstarting this technology and my
estimate is it was about $10 million
very little amount of public and and
films robic money that kickstarted this
technology got it to a point where
startups could start to implement the
technology.
>> I'd be curious to understand exactly
because MRIs have existed for a while
PCRs exist for a while. So why it took
this so long for this to be economical?
What what the nature of that cost curve
was? And I'm especially interested to
understand this because it seems to
imply that look, I mean, we didn't have
to come up with some brand new tech in
order to enable this. So are there other
things where somebody who is somewhat
familiar with the technological
landscape, people are always looking for
startup ideas, right? Yeah.
>> Should they just spend a couple days at
a big poultry farm or um pig farm or
something and see if things can't be
improved?
>> Yeah, I think there's huge potential for
technologists here. I mean, there is a
lot of low hanging fruit because this is
primarily a commodity business that has
only done things that reduce the price
or increase production levels.
>> Yeah.
>> It has not invested in animal welfare.
And as a result, you find these things
it's doing that just seem archaic. Like
the way that it is castrating piglets is
with a blunt knife and like no pain
relief. And so in that case, there was a
new technology of amino castration, an
injection that achieved the same effects
and and it was very easy to develop. And
so I think there are a whole lot of
other practices like that out there.
whole lot of these archaic practices
being done where someone could come in
and with a little bit of smart work
around this and an actual focus on
animal welfare bring in solutions that
could potentially help billions of
>> animals. I think one important dynamic
to this industry that you've pointed out
is that
>> we have to ruth whenever we have to
ruthyly optimize for efficiency in one
domain it causes all kinds of other
problems that we have to then make up
for with even more cruelty. I mean,
think of think of what we've done to
pigs. So, when we took pigs inside from
from outdoors
>> and we selected them to grow faster and
to have this inadvertent greater
aggression,
>> the the first thing they started doing
was getting bored and biting each
other's tails,
>> right?
>> And that was a problem. So, then we
said, "We'll cut the tails off." Well,
that didn't work. So, then we had to
start clipping the teeth and cutting
part of their teeth off.
>> And then that still wasn't enough when
it came to the cells. So, then we had to
put them in crates,
>> right,
>> to protect them from from any other
animal. That wasn't enough. So then we
gave them antibiotics and other drugs.
At each step there is a new solution
that that can't solve the fundamental
underlying parts of the problem and
sometimes just makes it some just makes
it worse. Could we make chickens or pigs
with no brains, right? Because there's a
suffering we care about. So to the
extent that their bodies are just these
incredibly well- evolved bioreactors for
converting grain into meat, whereas
optimization has led to um more and more
cruelty in the past. In this case, like
this is the ultimate optimization,
right? They're not moving around at all.
They're um they are literally just a
machine for producing more meat. Um
yeah, and then the suffering is in some
sense inefficient, right? like it causes
them to, you know, if they're pegging at
other animals, if they're cutting cotton
wires, etc. This this is something that
like it would be better even
economically to eliminate.
>> I think you're right. The suffering is
uneconomical at the level of an
individual animal. So like the animals
that we have selected for and the way we
have treated them result in more of
those animals dying, more of them having
all kinds of welfare problems. The
problem is that it is collectively more
efficient. So like if you can cram twice
as many animals into a barn, it doesn't
matter if 10% more of them die.
>> And so that's been the underlying model
of this industry is that the reason
welfare gets neglected is yeah, it has
like a slight cost, but the efficiency
gains are so much greater. So I agree we
should try and find things to reverse
that. I mean, I am personally more
optimistic about these kind of
incremental reforms. Like I think the
average person listening to this is not
thinking like, oh yeah, I'm really
pumped for like the chicken the
brainless chickens to come along and
like just just persuade me.
>> But but they're not pumped about the
cultivated media, right?
>> No. Sure. and and like this but this is
why you need a whole bunch of different
approaches, right? Like this is why
because like there's no one solution
that is going to satisfy everyone. And
what I would say on the on genetics is
what feels way more achievable to me in
the near term is to get rid of the
genetic physical problems that ail these
animals. So for instance, we've bred
these chickens to be mutants that like
collapse under their own weight. We know
that we can breed for far higher welfare
birds that are still commercially viable
and indeed there are companies and there
are places like Denmark where the
industry has already moved entirely
toward these higher welfare birds. They
have way better welfare outcomes that
suffer way less.
>> What what's different about them?
>> So so the first thing about them is they
are more balanced overall. So where the
industry has just selected for rapid
breast meat growth and for really
efficient feed conversion, these birds
have been bred to have robustness. So
they have broader legs. So like their
legs don't collapse. They have better
cardio systems so they don't develop all
these cardio problems. And in general,
they've just been bred for welfare
outcomes. Like we're just like, let's
just breed a bunch of birds and find the
ones that die less. And like generally
>> And are they are they less economical?
>> They're slightly less economical. I
mean, this is why because they have been
they haven't been ruthlessly selected
for those two two variables of breast
meat yield and and feed conversion. So
they cost a little bit more and this is
why you need advocacy to get people to
adopt them, right? And so there has been
huge advocacy in France, in Germany, in
Denmark to get this. In fact, just last
month, uh, the largest French chicken
producer, the LDC group, committed to
moving its two main brands to these
higher welfare genetics. Why? Why not
think that they will just be eaten up in
terms of their welfare impact to the
extent that the economics in the
industry for a century have been cramm,
you know, figure out how to optimize
along axes which just make the animal
incredibly unhealthy and um emiserated
for longer and in more extreme ways like
okay we'll come up with an innoving but
then there will be another thing which
is the equivalent of gestation crates.
Why think that even technologically the
thing that is favored is the um is the
suffering free optimizations?
>> Yeah, I mean I I think you're right.
This is the story of a lot of the
industry's efforts to improve welfare.
So for example, there was a study back
in the '90s where they taught chickens
how to select pain relief laced feed.
And they found the broiler chickens were
all selecting the pain relief laced feed
suggesting they were all in chronic
pain.
>> And the industry said like don't worry
we'll address it like we'll strengthen
their legs. So they went away and they
like strengthened their legs for a bit
and then they were like, "Wow, it's
great." Like the chickens have stronger
legs now. Like they can like go and eat
more stuff and we can put more weight on
those legs and so then they made them
like bigger and essentially undid those
gains. And in recent years we've seen
the mortality rate in the industry
rising again and getting worse. So
presumably they have just pushed so far
again in that direction. So I think
that's a major risk. I think this is why
you need government or corporations
involved. This is why you need
government setting down a baseline
standard saying you can't go below this
welfare floor. For instance, in Denmark,
the government is strongly encouraging
the move toward these higher welfare
breeds and looking to ban low welfare
outcome breeds entirely. And you need to
maintain those you need to maintain
those higher welfare outcomes. Uh and I
think this is what you need in corporate
supply chains too. So this is also what
you see with like the French retailers
moving away from these low welfare
breeds. You need them to maintain those
standards because you're right, the
industry left to its own on its own will
always find a race to the bottom.
So potentially we could find ways to
make animals even bigger um with the
future forms of biological progress that
some of my guests um talk about. It's
already the case that it's better to eat
beef than chicken because cows just have
so much more meat per brain. Um, what if
we just got rid of the myostatin
inhibitor genes or whatever and then now
there's even more meat per cow? Is it is
that better because you have more meat
per cow or is it worse because it's
potentially going to lead to the same
dynamic of these overgrown
more suffering animals. Um, which way
does that tilt?
>> I think it probably tilts toward more
suffering. M uh this is what you see
with the history of breeding these
chickens to be the kind of mutants they
are today where they've achieved a 4x
gain in growth rates uh since the 1950s
that has led to a 2x drop in price and
that has led to a 3x increase in
consumption and because consumption has
gone up so dramatically and the
suffering per bird has gone up so
dramatically that has outweighed the
benefits of these birds being bigger. Um
but the consumption might have gone up
regardless.
So actually then it's not clear they
would have to be to the extent that we
hold consumption constant maybe maybe we
shouldn't they would have to be
suffering fourx as much as a chicken in
the 1950s for it to be not be a net
improvement. I don't know if you
disagree with a
>> No. Well, I think there's there there is
a in between ground solution now, which
is the higher welfare breeds that we are
advocating for producers to adopt are
not 1950s growth levels. They grow
almost at 2025 growth levels scaled back
slightly in a way that enables much
larger welfare improvements. And so, I
think you don't have to go backwards to
to the level of these incredibly slow
breeding uh growing animals. Some people
will want that. I mean, there'll be a
market for like heritage chickens and
people who are willing to pay for these
like extremely slow growing animals, but
the the more realistic thing at scale is
going to be these ones who still grow
fast and still get big, but do so in a
way that doesn't totally destroy their
bodies and cause them to suffer so much.
is just striking me now. Um that the way
to think about what we're doing to these
animals is not even and this is already
be just incredibly immoral is finding um
creatures in the wild and then caging
them up and then putting them through
awful tortures. Rather, we are
manufacturing creatures
basically optimized for suffering.
Right? It's not even uh that like we
found this chicken and now we're going
to put this in this like little cage.
It's like we have designed this chicken
to basically suffer as much as possible.
We have like literally genetically
changed it as much as we can plausibly
change it given the technology available
to us today in like this uh in this um
Frankensteinian way to suffer as much as
possible. I don't know that that framing
just makes it like
yeah especially gruesome.
>> I agree. I mean this is the story of the
chicken meat industry is they have just
bred and bred so these animals suffer
more and more. And I'll give you another
example of that which is the breeding
birds. So the birds that they have have
that are raised for meat are optimized
to only survive until about seven or
eight weeks of age. And even by that age
a lot of them are keeling over getting
lame collapsing. But they're not at
puberty yet. So they need to raise some
of these birds past puberty to raise the
next generation of birds. For those
birds to not totally collapse under
their genetics, they have to starve
them. And so what they do is they give
the breeding birds about 30% of the feed
that the birds would eat on their own.
So they're like starving them 70%.
Because that is the only way to stop
these birds from completely collapsing
under the genetics that they've
inflicted on them. M in just reading
about the accounts of for example pigs
in gestation crates um and the medical
symptoms
you know like swollen ankles, broken
bones obviously from chewing the iron
bars um all the bruises that causes
ulcers tumors uh cancers puses etc.
These not being rare medical
emergencies, but the regular anticipated
expected outcomes um across populations
of pigs which individual farms will
house like thousands of them and of
course around the world a billion. I'm
sure you've visited many of these places
yourself or had friends who have done
so, right? Yeah, I mean I've I've
visited factory farms and I'll say it is
every bit as bad as it looks on the
videos you can find online. It is every
bit I mean the the the addition you see
is well first you you hear the noise the
the the distress uh yelps from these
animals. You smell it smells awful. But
the other thing I I noticed I visited
one egg factory farm and it's impossible
for farmers to provide individual care
to each of these birds. This was a
relatively well-run farm and yet I still
found a whole lot of hens stuck in the
wire and those hens are just going to
slowly starve. Like there is no and and
indeed many had there were a lot of dead
birds in with the live birds in other
cages and that's just because of the
scales like one farmer is trying to look
after like 200,000 hens. It's like the
only thing they can actually do is check
the feed lines and check the water lines
and like remove some of the dead birds.
>> Yeah.
>> And in fact that is the the work of a
factory farmer is largely removing dead
animals. Uh and so it is just this
dystopian thing where like the industry
presents this picture of like oh we have
like individual care for our animals and
it's like the scale at which you were
doing it has totally prohibited having
any kind of individual care like
>> right and this is an issue where a scope
sensitivity is just it is like so insane
the magnitude right if if if it
um battery cage farm was the only thing
that existed in the world right there
was like this one farm in India that had
100,000 uh chickens which were each just
experiencing
um weeks upon weeks of pain through
their life, that would already be um a
moral emergency. But it just it's so
easy to forget that if there's 10
billion chickens that are alive at any
point in the world, the whole problem is
five orders magnitude of magnitude
bigger than this one farm itself. Uh
like so 100,000 times bigger than this
one farm. It just like stupendous to
comprehend the scale of the problem.
It's crazy. And and you see this total
confusion in the laws we pass. So for
instance, dog fighting, which is a real
evil. It's horrific. But we're talking
about thousands of animals, and Congress
has passed multiple laws. Every state's
made it a felony. It is being regulated
correctly out of existence.
>> Meanwhile, the factory farming of pigs
occurs on this far greater SC. I mean,
we've even done the same thing with [__]
fighting, which is literally chickens,
and it's literally again thousands of
chickens. And we have rightly banned it.
We rightly made it felony animal
cruelty. And yet when factory farmers do
far worse to far larger number of
chickens, we call that commerce.
>> Right. Yeah. Okay. So the positive spin
on that can be that because of how big
the problem is and how um neglected it
is, the ability of any one person to
have a big impact might genuinely shock
them. So let's get into that. You are
the biggest funer in the space but
cumulatively between you and the others.
What is the amount of smart money that
is being allocated to this problem?
Yeah. So we think less than $300 million
is being devoted to all work globally
around every possible solution to
factory farming across every country.
And less than 200 million of that is
what you would probably consider smart
money going to evidence-based effective
interventions. So to put that into
perspective, philanthropic climate
advocacy alone is 50 times bigger than
that. The the work of cat and dog
shelters and rescue groups in the US
alone 25 times bigger than that. There
are individual conservation and poverty
charities that are 5 to 10x bigger than
that. So this is a tiny amount of money
for the purpose of social reform and yet
it has achieved a huge amount impacting
hundreds of millions, billions of
animals. What would happen if the amount
of funding in the space doubled from the
20030 million you mentioned that is
being spent smartly? I know you'll say
there's a bunch of things we could
optimize around, right? There's so many
neglected issues, but is there an
immediate thing where you're like this
is this is the thing that is directly at
the margin. The next 100 million or the
next 10 million would enable this. I
think additional funding would be
transformative. I mean, we have a
playbook that works on a number of these
issues. So, one of the first things
would be holding companies to account
for animal welfare policies they've
already made. We've got huge numbers of
companies that made commitments to
getting rid of battery cases and are now
trying to back out of them or ignore
them. With additional campaign funding,
we could hold them to those and as a
result immediately improve the
conditions of millions of animals. For
years, the industry used these battery
cages that are these microwave ovensiz
cages. They cram as many hens in as they
can and they they leave them there for
years. And we know consumers don't think
this is acceptable, but the industry
doesn't disclose their use of It's not
like when you pick up a pack of eggs, it
has a big thing saying from cage 10 or
like an image of where they came from.
>> And so advocates went to the largest
retailers, the largest fast food chains,
and said, "You need to move away from
this because your consumers already
expect this of you. This is what your
consumers clearly want and clearly don't
accept this practice." And they got
pledges from almost all of the largest
food companies, not just in the US, but
globally to move away from these
practices. And we're already seeing that
this transition has already spared over
200 million hens a year from these
battery cages. So the US has gone from
less than 10% cage to 47% cage free. The
European Union is now 62% cage free.
This is a huge transition. How do they
do this?
>> So I mean they they captured this this
basic divide between what consumers
expected was already happening and what
was actually happening. I I loved this
uh specific example of like there's a
super tractable thing that is like
immediately available with the next
millions of dollars in funding. Is there
a particular charity which works on
these campaigns in particular?
>> Well, I think that one great way to
support them is to support a diversified
portfolio of groups. So, uh, there's a
group farm kind that allows people to
donate to a variety of groups and two of
those groups that you can donate to
through that platform, the Humane League
and Synergy or Animal are both working
on exactly this. I think people just
might not be aware of the ratio of
dollars to suffering averted in this
space. Um, yeah, if if you can give some
sense of what we're talking about, uh,
dollar to suffering here.
>> Sure. So the work to get hens out of
cages has already spared over 200
million hens from cages. The work to
improve the lives of broiler chickens
has already benefited over a billion
animals.
>> That's just every year. And so
>> wait, sorry. It's 200 million a year.
>> 200 million a year.
>> Oh, sorry, I missed that. I thought it
was like cumulative across
>> No, no. So the cumulative number, we're
already well north of 500 million hands.
We're into the billions of of broyal
chickens. And if you assume these things
weren't just around the corner, they
weren't just going to happen anyway. If
you think you probably sped up progress
by years, decades, maybe it would never
have happened,
>> right?
>> Then that's cumulative impact over those
years and decades is giant. I mean,
we're talking billions. We're talking
tens of billions. Now, the amount of
money spent just on that those corporate
reforms, that was less than $100 million
a year uh over a couple years. And so
we're we're talking about a ratio that
is far less than 1:10 of a dollar per
year of of animal uh well-being
improved.
>> Wait, so $1,
you're saying $1 can do more than 10
years of a better um uh a more humane
life. That is stupendous, right? Like a
couple hours of pain is just awful and
terrible. you're saying 10 years um from
for a dollar. The reason why that's like
so shocking is that on its face is
shocking. But in other areas where
you're trying to like do global health
or something, first the problem is
improving on its own. Second, the Gates
Foundation, etc., there's tens of
billions of dollars already being poured
into the problem. Same with climate
change, etc. So the the idea that you
would find an intervention that h like a
single dollar can go this far is just um
it is just genuinely crazy. I think it's
very unique and I think the reason this
philanthropic opportunity exists is
because this area has been
systematically neglected which is to say
that most people when they think of
philanthropy do not think of farmed
animals. You know, it's most people pile
into the popular areas like education
and healthare and climate and as a
result you end up with these outsized
opportunities that no one has taken
advantage of. Like it's like if the
space had billions of dollars in it as
other philosophical areas do, you would
not see opportunities like this.
>> So I won't bury the lead any longer. Um
I've always been interested in this
issue. I lost track of it for a little
while to be honest, but I um encountered
you on Twitter and I started learning
more about the issue. We chatted a few
times in person and that motivated me to
have you on the podcast and also to um
donate myself. So, as you mentioned,
Farm Giving is this regranter. They
don't keep any of the money themselves.
They just regrant it to the most
effective charities in this area.
They're basically like an index fund
across the most effective charities in
animal welfare. And it motivated me to
donate to them. So I'm giving $250,000.
And I'm doing this as a donation match.
So this is to say that you, the
listener, if you contribute to this
donation match, we can double each
other's impacts. And between the two of
us, we can allocate $500,000. If you
saturate this, and I really wanted to
saturate this, $500,000 to the most
effective charities in this area, and
remember how neglected this area is, uh,
Lewis, as you were just mentioning, $1
that is donated in this area corresponds
to 10 years of animal suffering that is
averted, which is just stupendous to
think about. There's no other cause area
in the world which has such a crazy
ratio, and that has to do with how
neglected this area is. And of course,
the positive connotation of that
neglectedness is just how big an impact
any person listening to this podcast can
have. So that's a donation mash. And the
way you can contribute to it is to go to
farmkind.giving/dwarcash.
Now I also recognize that there's people
in the audience who can do much more
than this amount and the given how
neglected this issue is, right? Like
remember there's on the order of 100
million or 200 million that are being
spent wisely on this topic. One such
person listening could double the amount
of money that is being spent effectively
in this area. That's crazy to think
about, right? And if you are one such
person, just think about that. And even
if you can't double the amount of money
that's being spent in the area, you
could cause a double-digit increase in
the amount of funding that these
effective causes are receiving. So for
those people in the position to
contribute much more or at least want to
get their foot in the door and explore
contributions of 50k or higher um Lewis,
what's the best way they can reach you?
Yeah, in that case would love to hear
love to hear from you. So people can
message me on X or they can reach out to
my colleague Andreas that is Andreas was
1A. So it is a nopenfallanthropy.org
or and he would love to work with you
and and I'd love to work with you to
help you spend that money as effectively
as possible.
>> Okay. But um if you're like the rest of
us
and uh you need to start off on a more
humble basis, I think your donation
would already just have a huge impact
given how neglected the space is. Um so
again, the link is
farmkind.giving/barcash.
Okay. So let's talk about um other
countries because you are not only the
biggest funer in this cause area in the
United States but globally and then
obviously an animal suffering in Sri
Lanka or China is just as bad as an
animal suffering here. So what is
especially promising especially given
that more people in these countries will
start eating meat and this problem is
getting worse over time is getting worse
because people are getting wealthier and
eating more meat. what seems like the
most useful intervention or the useful
thing to understand about um
uh what to do about that?
>> Yeah, I think there are a couple of
things. So the first is countries where
their protein consumption is rapidly
growing and there is not yet a deeply
entrenched animal agricultural industry
have the ability to do things
differently and in particular they have
the ability to support alternative
protein work without that being
politically toxic. And so for example,
we see China investing very heavily in
cultivated meat research. The majority
of patents coming out globally on
cultivated meat now are coming out from
public universities in China. So this is
I this is a case where just like the US
is being overtaken because we have this
entrenched industry that is that is
ferociously lobbying. I also think
there's the potential to extend animal
welfare policies globally. So we're
seeing multinationals like Unoliever and
Nestle and even Burger King saying we
shouldn't have cages in our supply chain
globally. And this creates the potential
to spread best practices just in the
same way that factory farming spread
from the United States globally.
>> But factory farming spread because it
was cheaper,
>> right?
>> Not because there was some law passed
that everybody else felt the need to
copy.
>> That's right. That's right. So, so we
had essentially the the economic
efficiency spread factory farming and in
some cases that can spread higher
welfare tech. So for example inov sexing
technology once that has been derisked
enough once it is has been scaled up in
the Europe and the US I'm optimistic it
will become cheaper and then it will
just be scaled out globally for economic
reasons but there's also uh we can
spread moral progress so I mean we know
that people in these countries also care
about animal warfare and I I had a
fascinating conversation I went to a
trade show and I talked with a company
that manufactures crates manufactures
gestation crates and I was like you know
what do you think about the future sales
of these crates and they're like well we
already have stopped selling them in
Europe and the US. And I was like,
"Yeah, do you think you're going to just
be able to sell them in Asia forever?"
And they're like, "No way." Like, as
Asia gets like richer and is like on
social media and sees the images and
things like they're not going to be cool
with us either. Like we know there is a
a limit to how long we're going to be
able to sell these things for. And I
think that gives me some optimism that I
think as countries get richer, they
generally get more concerned about this
issue. And that then enables them to
adopt animal welfare reforms as we've
seen in the West. H on net is there a
good net curve here where initially they
get wealthier wealthy enough to have
afford the most economical forms of meat
which are battery cages etc and then
they get even wealthier so that they can
afford the potentially slightly more
expensive versions of meat which are
more humane or on net is just like you
keep eating more meat through this whole
process so even if it gets slightly more
ethical the amount of meat consumption
will have like 2x X or 3X. So, um,
wealth always correlates with more
suffering basically.
>> Yeah, it's mixed. So, so far globally,
wealth has heavily correlated with more
suffering. I mean, the the the drive of
people getting richer has led to them
eating far more meat and and far more of
that coming from factory farming. And we
have overwhelmingly seen that trend
across all countries. In a few European
countries, we are starting to see the
dynamic where once countries have
reached a certain degree of wealth, they
are able to imp to bring about reforms
that actually reduce the total amount of
suffering. Like I think it is quite
likely that Germany has passed the top
of that curve and is now on the other
side of of diminishing total animal
suffering.
>> Critical thing to bear in mind is this
does not happen on its own. Like in
Germany, this happened because there are
very talented advocates who harnessed
that public opinion and concern to drive
corporate reforms with the retailers and
to drive government policy reforms. And
I think we need to do that. Like I don't
think you can just count that people are
going to get to a certain degree of
wealth and this is going to happen. I
think it only happens if there is
advocacy to mobilize that public
opinion. So a difficulty that these
animal welfare policies have had is
even if you outlaw a practice
domestically to the extent that it's
cheaper to produce meat that way, people
will just import meat produced that way
that is made elsewhere. And so states in
the US who have tried to do this have
had this problem. Um countries in Europe
that have tried to do this have had this
problem.
H how do you solve the lowest common
denominator problem in um in animal
welfare standards?
>> Yeah, it's a huge problem. So advocates
in the US passed ballot measures in
Florida and Arizona to ban gestation
crates and then the pork industry just
imported crdated pork from other states
into those states.
>> So advocates then went to California and
Massachusetts and passed ballot measures
that extended the same standards to the
sale of pork within the state. You can't
sell pork from created pigs anywhere. I
think that is a critical move and we're
seeing the European Union now
considering doing the same thing,
imposing animal welfare standards
equally on imports. I think that policy
is is critical to not just ensuring that
you're not getting these these laws
undercut, but also to changing the
political dynamic because domestic
farmers, local farmers are going to be
very opposed to any law if they realize
that it's going to get undercut by state
competition, rightly so. And so I think
this is a chance to also change that
political dynamic so they can actually
support the law knowing that they are
not at a relative disadvantage.
>> Right. Um and potentially reversed by an
upcoming bill. Right.
>> This is right. So the the pork industry
unfortunately has looked at these laws
in California and Massachusetts and
wants to do everything it can to
undermine them. I mean, it knows this is
the only way it can be effectively
regulated given it has an absolute hold
on the legislature in Iowa and North
Carolina, which are the main states for
for pork production. It knows that it
needs to stop any other state from
setting production standards or or sales
standards. And so, it first went to the
Supreme Court. It first said, "This is
unconstitutional. The states can't do
this." And the Supreme Court disagreed.
We won at the Supreme Court. And so, now
it has gone to Congress. And it's saying
to Congress, you need to wipe out these
state laws. You need to stop them from
doing this. And the unfortunate thing is
the the Senate and the House are both on
track to do that. So in the upcoming
farm bill, there is language that would
ban states from passing laws uh on the
sales standard on on animal welfare
sales standards on goods. And right now
the default path is that that will pass
as part of the farm bill in the next few
months.
>> Okay. So if these advocates are able to
pass these laws or ballots at the state
level and it's popular enough that
they're passing, why is it at the
national level, they can't make a ruckus
about this and prevent this from getting
added to the full farm bill? The first
problem is structural. So at the state
level, they've had to use ballot
measures to get around entrenched
lobbies. In this case, things start out
in the House and Senate egg committees,
which are heavily dominated by
agricultural interests.
>> Yeah. The majority of House members, I
think, signed a letter against this in
the last Congress, but the vast majority
of them are not on the on the ad
committee. And so, the ad committee gets
to decide what's in this bill. And the
people on the ad committee, I mean, they
just the House ad committee just hosted
a hearing on this. They only invited
lobbyists for the industry. They didn't
bother to invite a single opposing
witness to their hearing. We're also
seeing that the the industry is much
better organized and funded on this
effort than advocates are. So the
industry is constantly flying out a
bunch of big industrial pork farmers
claiming they speak for the entire
industry telling the legislators this is
their number one priority and absolutely
has to be done. By contrast, animal
welfare groups are not getting the same
hearing. So legislators are not taking
them as seriously as they take these as
they take these aggra. Shouldn't there
be um
some political constituency that's
formed by the pork producers who are
using more ethical standards and who are
themselves being undercut by these Iowa
far farmers? Why aren't they uh getting
flown out to these congressional
hearings? And
>> that's exactly right. There is a large
constituency of family farmers who
support these laws because it has
created a new market opportunity for
them where they can sell their already
higher welfare meat and not be undercut
by the industrial stuff.
>> The problem they have is that they are
far less wealthy and organized than the
industrial pork interests. And so like
they don't have the money to like just
fly themselves to DC. They can't stop
farming. like the people who are
actually doing family farming can't just
like go to DC and like hang out for a
week cuz they need to be farming and
like looking after the pigs on their
farm.
>> But um the the meat lobbyist also given
that it's a commodity business, you
would think that there wouldn't be that
much surplus that they can dedicate to
political lobbying. So everybody here is
like not dowsted in cash. We can't
subsidize a couple plane tickets for
these family farmers. Like what's going
on? I mean there there are people who
are who are uh funding some of these
family farmers to go to Washington DC
but we could see a far bigger effort. I
think that that voice is being hugely
neglected in the debate. The other thing
I'll say on on the the money the pork
industry has is yes it's a commodity
business but it's also an oligopoly and
so you've got a very small number of
firms that process the vast majority of
pigs and they do seem to make outsized
profits. So they don't make the kind of
profits you would expect. And across
these industries, we constantly see
price fixing scandals and other
antitrust scandals because it's a very
small number of companies and it only
requires minimal coordination for them
to make to make greater profits than you
would think they could.
>> That might be good for animal welfare in
the sense that if they can extract
greater surplus, it makes it more
possible for them to potentially invest
in animal welfare. Not that they're
necessarily doing it, but it would like
it would make it possible. Completely
makes it possible. That's right. Like I
I think I mean this is the the absurdity
of this is that the egg industry has
been saying like we we can't possibly
afford this transition to cage free
eggs. They over the last few years of
high egg prices they've made insane
profits because this is a good well so
like Kelain which is the biggest egg
producer I think its share price has
like doubled over the last few years and
it's because the the price elasticity
for eggs it's very inelastic. So like
you can just keep cranking up the price
on even a very small reduction in supply
and you can then take all that surplus
>> and so they they've been doing that and
as a result you see a whole lot of these
industries they are actually flushed
with cash. The problem is
>> but is it on the order of hundreds of
millions billions?
>> Depends on the depends on the on the
company right so a lot of the egg
producers are actually relatively
smaller. It's the Tyson foods and things
that are on the billion on the billions.
Uh but no they have the money to do
these reforms. I mean that is not the
that is not the constraint. the
constraint is the willingness to do the
reforms.
>> So, if the majority of House members
have written this letter apparently
saying that they should be taken out of
the farm bill, um why is it still like
they're the people going to vote on
this, right? So, why is it still going
to pass?
>> Well, the problem is so this bill uh
stopping states from uh regulating farm
animal, this bill could not pass on its
own. So, if it was put on the floor of
the House and the Senate, it would lose.
This is why they're putting it in the
farm bill. So the farm bill is this huge
piece of legislation that includes all
the farm subsidies. It includes all the
food stamp uh assistance. And so this is
a bill that is considered a mustpass
piece of legislation and is decided
based on issues that most politicians
consider far bigger than the issue of
where the state laws are wiped out. M
>> and so what the industry is banking on
is that once they've got this in the
text of the bill, people aren't going to
sink the bill over this one provision
and it will sail through even though
it's a deeply unpopular policy.
>> Okay. I want your guide on how to
corrupt the political process in the
opposite direction. What what insights
do you have on how to actually have an
impact on how Congress people or state
legislators vote?
>> Yeah, I mean I think the good news here
is we have public opinion overwhelmingly
on our side. Right. So, like
>> that's that's good. Uh e ease the ease
the foot in the mouth I cause by saying
the word corrupt.
>> That's right. That's right. Well, this
we don't need to be corrupt, right? It's
like the industry needs to be corrupt
because they are trying to get
politicians to do something that their
voters strongly disapprove of.
>> And so I think what we need to do is
mobilize that base of support and show
how real it is. And so I think we need
for instance to mobilize animal welfare
advocates. We need to mobilize farmers
who benefit from higher welfare
standards. And we need to provide them
with an equal footing to the footing
that the industry has provided to the
very small number of factory farmers who
have a stake in the system. And that
requires the same things the industry
are doing. So I mean it it requires uh
flying people to DC. It requires getting
people to go and talk to their
politicians in their local district. And
yes, it also requires money because the
the industry is putting up so much
money. Politicians need to see that
there's also money on the other side of
this issue. And what would it actually
take to I know I hear this and I'm like
it's not clear what exactly you would do
uh if you if you wanted to get this
message in front of um like okay
abstractly you can give money or
whatever but like how does it actually
transfer to political influence? My
sense of what the industry does is they
get a whole bunch of their executives to
max out on donations to politicians. The
politicians then give them meetings,
>> right? And I wish this wasn't the way
the system worked, like I wish instead
that politicians were actually just
responsive to what the voters want.
>> But given this is how the system works.
I think that what people need to do is
to bind together with a couple of other
friends who care about this issue, max
out on your donations to a politician
and then meet with the politician and
say, "I really care about this and I'm
watching what you do on this issue." And
I think that if enough people did that,
and frankly, you don't even need to just
start donating. There are a lot of
people listening to this who probably
already donate significant amounts to
politicians. And if they started saying
to those politicians, by the way, this
is something I really care about and I'm
watching what you do on this issue. I
think you would start to see the
political dynamic change.
>> You wrote in one of your recent blog
posts that the meat lobby spends on the
order of $45 million in any given
election cycle. and they seem to be able
to have influence on the topics they
care about, which would be astounding
and make jealous all of us in tech. You
know, like there are probably people
listening to this podcast who could
spend on the order of that kind of money
on politics, but the ability of tech to
have an impact on the kinds of issues
that they care about is quite minuscule
compared to the meat industry. So,
what's going on here? What's the
political economy of meat here?
>> Yeah, it's a real puzzle. I mean, this
is an industry that accounts for less
than 1% of Americans, is trying to
defend wildly unpopular practices and
doesn't even get that much money and yet
somehow they have this total lock on the
legislative process where they can stop
any animal welfare legislation from
passing.
>> I think there are a couple things going
on. So, I think the first thing is it's
not just them. They are fighting
alongside of the entire agriculture
industry. There are allied industries
like the insurance industry, the farmer
industry that have a big stake in
factory farming. They also, it's not
just the money. So they appeal to this
myth mythos of the American farmer.
People think the American farmer is the
good, hardworking, soul of the earth
person. They sell the image of this
person out in the fields tending to
their chickens and their pigs. They
don't realize these are factory farmers.
>> And they're extremely wellorganized. I
mean, they have a very formidable
lobbying presence in Washington DC and
across state capitals. and they have
effectively used that to block any kind
of regulation.
>> You're telling me that tech bros aren't
as politically sympathetic as with the
assaulting the other farmer?
>> You know, there's the there's this uh
children's kids book rule of politics,
which is you should never mess with a
character in a children's book. And you
know, that's the the police, that's the
doctors, that's the farmers. And I don't
think there are any tech bros in the
kids books yet.
>> The front end developers have yet to
grace the covers.
>> That's right. So you you should describe
the sort of franchise hierarchy type
structure of a lot of these meat
companies, but you would anticipate that
yes, the Purdus and Tyson's of the world
would want a particular thing to happen
in terms of political processes, but the
farmers who are indebted to these
companies often have an adversarial
relationship. Why are they able to form
an effective political coalition with
them? Yeah, this is a great point. I
think most people don't realize that the
way these factory farms are structured
is you have these giant corporations
like Tyson Foods or Smithfield, they
mostly don't own their own farms.
Instead, they have these contract
farmers who are essentially indentured
laborers. I mean, they they have a huge
loan hanging over their head and they're
farming. And so why why would those
people support this? The answer is they
often don't. And I think the uh agrous
lobbying associations have done a very
good job of pretending they do. So they
uh present themselves as representing
the farmers. But if you look at their
boards, if you look at the people who
are actually leading these
organizations, it's made up of people
from the giant aggra businesses and the
very largest industrial farmers. They do
not have small contract farmers on the
boards of these organizations. And so I
I think it really is a bit of a bait and
switch where they claim to be
representing those family farmers, but
they're not.
>> And what is the reason that these
contract farmers are willing to work
with these large businesses? Because
people will often say things like, "Oh,
Uber is bad for Uber drivers." And I'm
just like I trust Uber drivers to know
what's best for them. Why would these
small farmers be working with these
companies in the first place if it's
uneconomical for them?
>> Yeah. So it depends. I mean for some
people it is just the the the least bad
option they have, right? Uh and
especially if someone just has a little
we bit of land and they want to preserve
that land and they don't have other
skills they can use. M but you know I
mean I I was uh chatting with this guy
Craig Watts who was a chicken contract
farmer for Purdue and he told me that
when he got into the business they made
all these exorbitant claims to him. I
mean they said you're going to be making
over $100,000 within years. They they
said just get out this loan and it's
going to be incredible. Told him all the
things that could go right and then he
got into the business and they slowly
started eroding the payments to him. So
they slowly started paying him less and
less. they slowly got to a point where
he was making less and less money and he
wanted out but by that point he couldn't
get out because he had this giant loan
hanging over his head
>> and so I do think you've got a bunch of
these people who are stuck in the
situation and there aren't easy
alternatives cuz normally in one area
there will only be one processor that
has a slaughter house in that area
>> so there's not effective competition
going on also often you're locked in
these long-term contracts as well so
there there is an element of people
being locked in this and then there's an
element of people just not having better
choices
>> right and what is the alternative use of
that land so if you didn't work with um
centralized processor is the alternative
use of that land for farming like if
you've inherited some land and you like
want to figure out what to do with it.
What can you do with it?
>> I I mean I think ideally we would see
pasture-based farming in those places
and you know it doesn't require that
much land for instance to have a
pasture-based chicken farm. The problem
is you would need to find a processor
that you could work with and normally
that just doesn't exist. So normally
you've only got the giant players in an
area and they say we just want commodity
production. we don't want to fund you to
do this pasture-raised stuff. And so you
get locked into that contract. And so
oftentimes people who are doing
pasture-raised production have to create
their entire supply chain by themselves.
Like they they literally have to build
their own slaughterhouse and create
their entire supply chain around that
which drives up costs massively.
>> Why is that? Because there must be
enough consumers who want even if it's
not a majority of consumers, there must
be enough that there's some economic
incentive to set up the economies of
scale and supply chains that would make
it easier to set up such a farm, right?
So why doesn't that exist? So there are
people who are trying. So Nimon Ranch
for instance has done this with
independent pork farmers. There was a
big effort to do this by Cooks Ventures
with pasture-raised chicken. And
unfortunately they just went out of
business. And I think the reason they
went out of business is because there is
such huge mislabeling across the
industry that it's very hard to separate
out what's actually better. So for
instance, much factory- farmed chicken
in the US is sold with the label all
natural. And we know from surveys that
people think all naturatural means the
chickens were outside, it actually means
nothing. But if you're trying to sell
your product as like pasture-raised next
to a product that says all natural, and
people think it means the same thing and
your product costs $2 more, you're not
you're not going to get very far, right?
And so I think so long as we have this
rampant mislabeling, it's very hard for
the for the other players to to get
ahead.
>> Yeah. I guess I was wondering so if you
um there's like normal bananas and
there's organic bananas and people are
willing to pay quite a bit more for
organic bananas. I feel like pasture
race should be in the similar embedding
space as like organic where like
organics is a huge industry even though
it has dubious uh medical benefits um
etc. So then the qu the problem is not
that if there was accurate labeling you
think there might be consumer demand to
make this a viable um much larger
industry it's just that it's it's very
hard for consumers to identify which is
which yes so I mean I think you actually
see that in the egg sector in the US so
within eggs there is clearer labeling
cage free actually means something
pasture actually means something you
can't put the all natural label on and
what we see is that the pasture-raised
egg sector is growing rapidly and even
then it is still handicapped by the fact
that supermarket markets use this as a
price differentiation tool. So they know
that wealthier consumers prefer
pasture-based eggs and are also less
price sensitive and so they mark them up
heavily. So the price you see is way
inflated beyond the actual cost
difference and yet still that is a
rapidly growing sector.
>> Okay. So this is one thing I wanted to
ask you about. One point you've often
made is you have to understand that meat
and agriculture generally is a commodity
business. Um in a commodity business
you'd expect all margins to be competed
away. I think it's in one of your blog
post that for a dozen eggs it costs 19
cents more to have them be cage-free but
often chains will charge on the order of
$1.70 more for cage-free eggs. So if
it's commodity business why is it
possible for supermarkets to extract
this extra margin? I think this is the
non-commodity part of the of the of the
industry. But I mean the broader context
on those retailers is
>> US retailers almost all the top US
retailers have made pledges to stop
selling eggs from cage tents.
>> What they are now saying, a lot of them
were meant to do that by this year and a
lot of them have not done it. Walmart,
Kroger have not followed through. And
what they say is, well, our consumers
don't want the K3 eggs because they're
way more expensive, right?
>> And it's true. They're way more
expensive. They're selling them for like
a dollar to $2 more per dozen.
>> When you look at the underlying
production costs, it's only 19 cents
difference.
>> And so what we see is these retailers
are using this as an opportunity to get
a big markup with less price sensitive
consumers and are in the process
massively hampering their ability to
fulfill their commitments. By contrast,
Costco went to 100% cage. They followed
through on their promise. And what we
see is they are now selling cage-free
eggs for the same price as Walmart sells
its caged eggs. So there is that
competitive pressure once K3 becomes the
new baseline. It does become the
commodity market and you do see those
margins competed away. Same thing in
states where they've banned the sale of
caged eggs. Cage free eggs now cost the
same thing as the cage eggs cost next
door. So you do see that competed away
once it becomes the commodity. It's
until it reaches that point that you're
seeing these these crazy margins.
>> Interesting. if these companies are
already um making these commitments in
many cases following through on them to
move towards more ethical ways of
procuring meat, procuring eggs, etc. I
think I learned from you that McDonald's
is has um made these commitments or that
Chipotle has made these commitments. I
didn't learn from McDonald's. um what is
the reason that this is not a more
prominent part of their own advertising
given how much consumers um how
universally popular animal welfare is.
>> So the very best companies are
advertising this like vital farms or
nest fresh eggs like they are out front
focusing on the animal welfare benefits
because they're pasture-raised and it
looks amazing. the the fundamental
problem for the large scale companies is
they have just made things less bad and
it's still really good what they're
doing like moving from cage to cage-free
is incredible but I think there are two
problems so one is their consumers
already thought they weren't using caged
eggs so if they advertise like hey we're
cagree now everyone's like what what
were you doing all this time like you
didn't tell us you were using caged eggs
and people still might think that even
the new reality is not as good as what
they thought things should be like they
still would rather the animals were
going outside which they're not. And in
a lot of cases there are these phasins
over time. So like McDonald's like in 10
years time we're going to get rid of the
cage eggs. It's like well you don't want
to advertise that too loudly because for
the next 10 years I'm eating caged eggs
and I didn't know that previously. Like
so I think that is just the unfortunate
dynamic is because this dissonance is so
great between current practices and the
reality that merely getting rid of the
worst practices is not enough to create
an advertising claim. It seems like
given how fast you're able to secure
these commitments from different
corporations, from retailers to um
restaurants, etc., it seems like
corporate campaigns are even more
successful than policy or even is like
corporations are much more receptive.
They're actually like a um I mean
there's obviously I don't know Purdue
and Tyson are corporations as well, but
um the rest of like the actual industry
of getting food to consumers just seems
incredibly receptive to these kinds of
pressure campaigns and maybe that's a
lever of change that's especially
salient.
>> I I think it has been. I think it's been
phenomenally successful with these
consumerf facing brands like the
retailers, the fast food chains. uh
advocates have been able to secure over
3,000 corporate animal welfare pledges
now globally, including from all the
biggest retailers, all the biggest food
chains affecting hundreds of millions of
animals. And I I think the reason for
that is twofold. The first is there's a
totally different structure from the
structure in place on the legislative
side. On the legislative side, if you
want to pass an animal welfare reform in
Congress or in any state legislature, it
goes to the agriculture committee. The
agriculture committee is dominated by a
bunch of people who are in the pocket of
big egg and they kill the bill. It never
even gets out of that committee, let
alone getting to the whole legislature.
If you go to a company, you go to
someone who has is a decision maker who
is not being lobbied by industry or if
they are being lobbied is far less
susceptible to that lobbying than they
are. I also think companies have just
proven more responsive to consumers than
politicians are to their voters. I think
politicians have decided that they need
to be responsive on like the 10 issues
their voters care most about. Maybe it's
fewer than that, but that on low
salience issues like this, they can just
ignore what their voters want and do
what their donors are telling them what
to do or what's easier to do. Whereas I
think what corporations are finding is
actually if consumers are really
outraged about this, then we need to
act. And maybe this is higher on the
list of salience for consumers at a
retailer cuz they're not worried about
like what's their taxation policy? you
know it's like for a retailer actually
what is the quality of the goods you are
selling or like that is a pretty
critical factor and we know one thing
I'll say is we know from surveys
uh that when it comes to sustainability
animal welfare is the top thing people
care about so for all this talk we see
from companies about like climate change
and prioritizing climate change both the
McDonald's and the Tyson's and so on
they they've all said like this is the
thing that consumers actually care about
>> wait so then what is the reason that the
animal welfare movement has gotten so
wrapped up with um you go to most uh
landing pages for animal welfare stuff
and like it'll be like we're improving
um animal lives and we're making farming
more sustainable, we're addressing
climate change and that just seems
really strange to me. Like okay, we're
torturing tens of billions of animals a
year, but then also we're reducing
emissions. Like we'll figure out some
other way to reduce emissions, right?
Like how did this become the same issue
in the first place?
>> Yeah. I mean, there's been this weird
conflating and there's even been this
very cynical exploitation of the climate
issue by producers to not do animal
welfare reforms. So, something that like
Tyson Foods will say is we can't move to
these higher welfare breeds because they
would have a slightly bigger carbon
footprint because they eat like a little
bit more and like also if you let the
animals move around a lot like they
expend more calories and so that's got
like a bigger carbon footprint, right?
Like it's it's this total absurdity. I
had a conversation with the SVP for
sustainability at one of the largest
meat companies And what they told me
was, "Yes, we know from internal surveys
that animal welfare is actually more
important to consumers, but we are far
more responsive to what the fast food
companies and the investors are telling
us." And the fast food companies and the
investors are obsessed with climate like
ESG stuff.
>> I think ESG stuff, I think they've all
made these targets that they need to to
implement and those targets are getting
much higher priority than the targets
they made on animal welfare. But then
what why do animal charities
um it's not like just a cynical attempt
by the meat industry. If you go to
animal charity websites, they'll often
also emphasize sustainability on their
landing page. And I understand other
people's psychologies are different. So
I don't want to project um the way I
think about it when at least whenever I
see that I'm like, "Oh, wait. Are you
actually optimizing for the thing that
makes this a really salient issue for
me? uh or are you just going to like
optimize for carbon footprint um rather
than this incredible amount of suffering
that uh this industry produces. So yeah,
why are they doing this? Like why why
why have your friends like roped in
sustainability into this area? I
>> I think a lot of people care about
multiple things, right? They they care
about animal welfare and they care about
sustainability and it is true that in
certain cases these things go hand in
hand. So like alternative proteins are
both better for animal welfare and have
a smaller environmental footprint. So
like they are more sustainable.
>> This is not always the case. And I think
for instance, one thing that is is wild
to me is where you have people out there
telling people to switch from beef to
chicken because it's better for the
climate.
>> Like literally that switch is 23 more
animals per year you'll be consuming
costing several years worth of suffering
in these factory farms for a pretty
marginal climate impact. And so I do
think there is often this tendency that
climate just gets total presence. It's
just seen as like well obviously that's
more important than like any number of
animals suffering. And I actually think
that that is more of like an elite
narrative than it is what regular people
think. Like I actually think regular
people are just pretty horrified by
animal suffering and do prioritize that.
Le coming on the podcast and also thank
you for the work you do. you are
allocating the largest amount of
philanthropic funding in the space and
I'm sure look you're a cheery fellow but
I'm sure day in and day out this is not
um
uh pleasant work to do to learn about
these gruesome details and how we can
make the situation better but um it's
awesome that you're doing it. So thank
you for coming on and thank you for your
work.
>> Thank you very much and thank you for
both being willing to take on this tough
topic on your podcast and for making
such a generous donation match. I'm
really excited about the impact you can
have there.
>> Cool. Awesome.